add swip-26: strictly typed chunk system (#67)
ethersphere/SWIPs: SWIPs/swip-26.md

---
swip: 26
title: Standardised Chunk Type Framework
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: Core
author: mfw78 (@mfw78)
created: 2025-03-03
---

## Simple Summary
This SWIP introduces a standardised framework for defining chunk types in Swarm, improving security and interoperability through consistent type identification and validation.

## Abstract

> This SWIP proposes a standardised framework for defining and processing chunk types in Swarm. By creating a formal type system for chunks, including content-addressed chunks (CAC) and single-owner chunks (SOC), we improve security, interoperability, and maintainability across the Swarm ecosystem. The proposal defines a structured approach to chunk identification, versioning, and validation without modifying the wire protocol. Key innovations include fixed-length type-specific headers, deterministic address calculation, and formalised validation rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SWIP proposes a standardised framework for defining and processing chunk types in Swarm. By creating a formal type system for chunks, including content-addressed chunks (CAC) and single-owner chunks (SOC), we improve security, interoperability, and maintainability across the Swarm ecosystem. The proposal defines a structured approach to chunk identification, versioning, and validation. The key innovation is the formal definition of fixed-length type-specific headers to be delivered alongside chunks and formally documenting address determination and payload validation rules.
```

## Motivation

> Swarm's storage layer is built around chunks as the fundamental unit of data. Currently, the system supports multiple chunk types, but lacks a standardised type system. This creates several issues:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Swarm's storage layer is built around chunks as the fundamental unit of data. Currently, the system supports multiple chunk types, but lack standardised headers. This creates several issues:
```

1. **Ambiguous Processing**: Without explicit type information, chunk processing depends on implicit detection methods, leading to potential security vulnerabilities.

> 2. **Limited Extensibility**: Adding new chunk types requires changes to core validation logic, making it difficult to evolve the system.

Author: Replica chunks come to mind as a natural extension, instead of slicing this into the SOC chunks. By not communicating the type of a chunk on the wire-level, this makes execution non-deterministic which leaves open potential issues surrounding resource starvation (e.g. a concerted actor can send chunks that are _always_ SOC chunks, and, on the assumption that most chunks are CAC chunks, lead to a double-spike in resource consumption as all chunks must first go through the CAC check first.

> 2. **Limited Extensibility**: Adding new chunk types requires changes to core validation logic, making it difficult to evolve the system.

Reviewer: not sure i agree with this (core validation logic) but yes standardising the chunk type types will make it easier moving forward and we should use SWIPs to define these

Reviewer: the specific validation methodology is a decision for those implementing client, which i am glad will be enabled with the additional information given by the headers, even for the two currently agreed chunk types

> 2. **Limited Extensibility**: Adding new chunk types requires changes to core validation logic, making it difficult to evolve the system.

Reviewer: i think we concur there is enough cause to implement it regardless of current dearth of solid future plans for more chunks. so marking this as resolved

This approach allows for early validation of chunk integrity based on protocol-level type information, reducing parsing errors and simplifying processing logic.

#### Flowchart

The flowchart below illustrates the processing steps for a chunk:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start[Receive chunk via wire protocol] --> A[Protobuf decodes chunk type, version, header, and payload]
    A --> B{Header size matches expected size for type?}
    B -->|No| C[Fail: Invalid header size]
    B -->|Yes| D[Extract type-specific header fields]
    D --> E[Calculate chunk address using type-specific function]
    E --> F{Validate chunk content}
    F -->|Invalid| G[Fail: Invalid chunk content]
    F -->|Valid| H[Process payload according to type-specific structure]
    H --> I[Pass processed chunk to appropriate protocol handler]
    I --> End[Protocol-specific processing]
```

## Rationale

The proposed standardised chunk type framework addresses several key issues in the current implementation:

1. **Type Ambiguity**: By explicitly encoding chunk types in the header, we eliminate ambiguity in chunk processing, enhancing security and reliability.

> 2. **Extensibility**: The formal specifications allow for future chunk types to be added in a standardised way without modifying core validation logic.

Reviewer: agree, let's ensure we discuss this if/when new chunk types are proposed

3. **Validation Consistency**: Centralising validation rules in the specifications ensures consistent enforcement across components and implementations.

4. **Memory Efficiency**: Fixed-length headers enable predictable memory allocation and reduce fragmentation.

5. **Parsing Efficiency**: Type-specific parsing paths reduce the need for speculative parsing, improving performance.

The design choices prioritise:
- Security through explicit typing and validation
- Efficiency through predictable memory allocation and fail-fast validation
- Extensibility through the standardised specification system
- Backward compatibility with existing chunk types

## Backwards Compatibility

This proposal maintains backward compatibility by:

1. Preserving existing chunk address calculation methods for current chunk types
2. Supporting current chunk formats with version 0 of each type

> 3. Allowing for gradual adoption of the type system

Reviewer 2: for me, first, it seems like it needs a breaking change in the base protocol to handle type headers.

Reviewer: i think it is fine for a client to opine methodology around when to determine chunk types  in the first instance

as far as the protocol is concerned, i believe protobuf fields are optional, but sending headers should become mandatory once the swarm has had time to adjust. in this way the change could be made with less disruption. let's pin down our approach. thank you for raising this @nugaon

7. Apply type-specific validation rules
8. Process the payload according to type-specific structure

This approach allows for early validation of chunk integrity based on protocol-level type information, reducing parsing errors and simplifying processing logic.

#### Flowchart

The flowchart below illustrates the processing steps for a chunk:

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    Start[Receive chunk via wire protocol] --> A[Protobuf decodes chunk type, version, header, and payload]
    A --> B{Header size matches expected size for type?}
    B -->|No| C[Fail: Invalid header size]
    B -->|Yes| D[Extract type-specific header fields]
    D --> E[Calculate chunk address using type-specific function]
    E --> F{Validate chunk content}
    F -->|Invalid| G[Fail: Invalid chunk content]
    F -->|Valid| H[Process payload according to type-specific structure]
    H --> I[Pass processed chunk to appropriate protocol handler]
    I --> End[Protocol-specific processing]
```

### Wire Protocol Representation

To enable typed chunks at the wire level, the following Protocol Buffer definitions shall be used:

#### Chunk Message

```protobuf
message Chunk {

>   uint32 type = 1;    // Chunk type identifier (see type table)

Reviewer 3: a note about this - not sure if having a uint32 is: a. too permissive, b. too big.
since i don't see the list of chunk types and their versions to be too much in flux, consider using protobuf enums here (one for type, one for version), and we will bear the brunt of maintaining that in long run. alternatively, having `bytes` here with `len = 1` would narrow down what is needed here. honestly i think enums would work best here. also, consider having `type` and `version` to be represented in one enum - this would probably allow to simplify downstream business logic. compare:
```go
if type == 1 {
 if version == 0 {...}
 if version == 1 {...}
}
```
with:
```go
switch type {
 case swarm.CacV1:
  ...
 case swarm.CacV2:
  ...
}
```

Author: I'd certainly be a fan of using enums, and would prefer this, but left this method out as there seems to have been an intentional non-committal towards firm typing. I am a little concerned that the definition of the _type_ would leak _type implementation_ details into the other. Ideally as well, could also compress down to u8 instead of u32, but the idea here was to keep the contents of the frame somewhat within a cache line for a 64 bit machine (to be fair though, I don't have firm benchmarks to support necessitating this). 

Can you propose a concrete alternative / suggestion to the protobuf(s)?

Reviewer 3: @mfw78 I'm not sure I fully understand your last message:
> left this method out as there seems to have been an intentional non-committal towards firm typing

by whom? why?

>I am a little concerned that the definition of the type would leak type implementation details into the other. 

define: "other". did not really understand the sentence here.

> Ideally as well, could also compress down to u8 instead of u32, but the idea here was to keep the contents of the frame somewhat within a cache line for a 64 bit machine (to be fair though, I don't have firm benchmarks to support necessitating this).

I'm not 100% sure I understand here. I'm not sure I can in any way assume that anything I write in go can be guaranteed to do a specific number of CPU-Cache ops, not to mention byte alignment etc - we're still going through protobuf which adds so much more abstraction in the middle. If we would be writing this in ASM, OK. Even Rust, Ok - but how can we reason about this without having written the encoders/decoders ourselves?
I think the optimization here is probably not really necessary. It's not like we're doing insane amount of chunk operations here. The whole reserve size is a few million chunks...

Reviewer 3: By the way, since protobuf uses varint encoding for the chunk types, I am fine with leaving things as they are if this throws a wrench into getting this done. It is fine, and doing enums vs. separate fields is really a nitpick from my side (we have bigger problems to solve and it's probably not worth spilling too many words on).
